---
title: SB 53
description: A list of upcoming and past protests.
---

**Californians: we need YOUR help to pass (and improve) crucial AI safety legislation!**

SB 53 is among the most ambitious AI safety bills in the country. If passed, the [bill](https://legiscan.com/CA/text/SB53/2025) would:

- Require frontier AI companies to implement and publish safety protocols that include assessment and testing of catastrophic risks;
- Establish third-party audits of frontier AI companies to verify compliance with these safety protocols;
- Protect whistleblowers at AI companies, ensuring they are free to speak out about critical AI risks. 

However, the bill has a flaw. Its provision establishing third-party audits **wouldn’t take effect until 2030**. Five years from now is too late!

The bill is currently in the Assembly Appropriations Committee, where it’s expected to remain until this Friday. If it passes through the committee, it will head to the Assembly floor for a full vote.

 
**We have a window of opportunity** to 1) make sure the bill passes the committee, and 2) to amend it to take effect as soon as possible (not in 2030!) 

## **Here’s what you can do to help, before Friday August 29th:**

- **Call and email Appropriations Committee members** and ask them to advance SB 53 to a full floor vote. (https://mstr.app/157e6713-7bb5-409c-be57-6ad010afb282)
- **Call and email Senator Scott Wiener’s office** in support of an amendment. Senator Wiener is the bill’s lead author and an outspoken AI safety advocate. You should voice your support for the bill, and ask Senator Wiener to introduce an amendment that sets implementation no later than 2026. (https://mstr.app/c6818319-a007-4123-8231-551f012cc62a) 

Additionally, please **share our action alert** with anyone you know in California and ask them to take action: https://mailchi.mp/d91a7546f38d/urgent-humanity-needs-your-help-to-get-sb-53-over-the-line?e=df9565ea26

Thank you so much for your support!
